---
title: 7.10.4 Data Flow, Workflow
weight: 12
---

7.10.4 Data Flow, Workflow## 7.10.4 Data Flow, Workflow

Database applications are often part of a larger enterprise application that in- teracts not only with the database system but also with various specialized ap- plications. For example, in a manufacturing company, a computer-aided design (CAD) system may assist in the design of new products. The CAD system may extract data from the database via an SQL statement, process the data internally, perhaps interacting with a product designer, and then update the database. Dur- ing this process, control of the data may pass among several product designers as well as other people. As another example, consider a travel-expense report. It is created by an employee returning from a business trip (possibly by means of a special software package) and is subsequently routed to the employee’s manager, perhaps other higher-level managers, and eventually to the accounting depart- ment for payment (at which point it interacts with the enterprise’s accounting information systems).

The term _workflow_ refers to the combination of data and tasks involved in pro- cesses like those of the preceding examples. Workflows interact with the database system as they move among users and users perform their tasks on the workflow. In addition to the data on which workflows operate, the database may store data about the workflow itself, including the tasks making up a workflow and how they are to be routed among users. Workflows thus specify a series of queries and updates to the database that may be taken into account as part of the database- design process. Put in other terms, modeling the enterprise requires us not only to understand the semantics of the data but also the business processes that use those data.  

### 7.10.5 Other Issues in Database Design

Database design is usually not a one-time activity. The needs of an organization evolve continually, and the data that it needs to store also evolve correspond- ingly. During the initial database-design phases, or during the development of an application, the database designer may realize that changes are required at the conceptual, logical, or physical schema levels. Changes in the schema can affect all aspects of the database application. A good database design anticipates future needs of an organization, and ensures that the schema requires minimal changes as the needs evolve.

It is important to distinguish between fundamental constraints that are ex- pected to be permanent and constraints that are anticipated to change. For exam- ple, the constraint that an instructor-id identify a unique instructor is fundamen- tal. On the other hand, a university may have a policy that an instructor can have only one department, which may change at a later date if joint appointments are allowed. A database design that only allows one department per instructor might require major changes if joint appointments are allowed. Such joint appointments can be represented by adding an extra relationship, without modifying the _in- structor_ relation, as long as each instructor has only one primary department affiliation; a policy change that allows more than one primary affiliation may require a larger change in the database design. A good design should account not only for current policies, but should also avoid or minimize changes due to changes that are anticipated, or have a reasonable chance of happening.

Furthermore, the enterprise that the database is serving likely interacts with other enterprises and, therefore, multiple databases may need to interact. Con- version of data between different schemas is an important problem in real-world applications. Various solutions have been proposed for this problem. The XML data model, which we study in Chapter 23, is widely used for representing data when it is exchanged between different applications.

Finally, it is worth noting that database design is a human-oriented activity in two senses: the end users of the system are people (even if an application sits between the database and the end users); and the database designer needs to interact extensively with experts in the application domain to understand the data requirements of the application. All of the people involved with the data have needs and preferences that should be taken into account in order for a database design and deployment to succeed within the enterprise.

